12-Aug-2024

Dr. Hans Moritz Guenther
MIT
Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research
77 Massachusetts Avenue
NE83-569
Cambridge, MA 02139


Title: Concept of a Double Tilted Rowland Spectrograph for X-rays

Dear Dr. Guenther,

We have received the new reviewer's report on your above revised submission to The Astrophysical Journal, and it is appended below. As you will see, the reviewer thinks highly of your work and has only a few suggestions for relatively minor changes.

When you resubmit, please outline the revisions you have made in response to each of the reviewer's comments using plain text in the field provided when you upload the revised manuscript. Citing each of the reviewer's comments immediately followed by your response would be particularly helpful.

Click the link below to upload your revised manuscript;
https://aas.msubmit.net/cgi-bin/main.plex?el=A5KO2Ip7A5prm3J7A9ftdUM9xHIZCelt5JIitss2n8QZ
Alternatively, you may also log into your account at the EJ Press web site, https://apj.msubmit.net. Please use your user's login name: hamogu. You can then ask for a new password via the Unknown/Forgotten Password link if you have forgotten your password.

Reviewers find it helpful if the changes in the text of the manuscript are easily distinguishable from the rest of the text. Therefore we ask you to print changes in bold face. The highlighting can be removed easily after the review.

The AAS Journals have adopted a new policy that manuscript files become inactive, and are considered to have been withdrawn, six months after the most recent reviewer's report is sent to the authors, provided a revised version has not been received by that time.

If you have any questions, feel free to contact me.

Sincerely,
Chris Lintott
University of Oxford
Department of Physics
chris.lintott@aas.org

----------------------------------------------------------------------
Reviewer Report
Reviewer:
This is a nice paper, describing the design of a versatile X-ray diffraction grating spectrometer, trading and optimizing resolving power, effective area, and physical footprint. The paper nicely outlines how the geometry generalizes the Rowland geometry that underlies the diffraction grating spectrometers on Chandra and XMM-Newton.

I much appreciated the extensive graphics; it is always a challenge to describe diffraction geometry, especially to skeptical audiences (who would often much prefer to do spectroscopy with straightforward imaging spectrometers). In that sense, this paper will be very useful as a reference for any instrument concept that relies on diffraction. I look forward to trying the interactive visualization in the published paper (*).

I had a few minor comments:

It may help, in the caption to Figure 2, to state explicitly that the torus is generated by rotating the circle around the dotted axis.

The concept of the blaze angle for CAT gratings, or ordinary reflection gratings, isn't defined anywhere. To make the paper self-contained, it would help to do so. And then
it will be clearer how the design process works: select blaze angle, then design Rowland geometry accordingly.

It may help, for the casual or first-time reader, to also produce a monochromatic version of Figure 5. If the reader has not fully realized that the ray traces cover a stretch of continuum, she or he may be confused by Figure 5. As it stands, the Figure folds together an array of independent concepts: subaperturing and resolving power, intrinsic astigmatism, the Rowland geometry, the double spectrograph idea. It might help to show the 'Green's function' for a single wavelength.



(*) it is probably my own fault, but when I load the html, Java replies that it couldn't load the data.




